---
last_modified_at: Thu, 19 Dec 2024 12:21:32 -0800  # 909a73c publish-spinach
layout: post
title: Spinach
aliases:
  - /drafts/spinach/
categories: spinach, epistemology
---
Yesterday I was reminded of the occasion on which I first learned about
spinach having not as much iron as commonly believed, and that the idea
came down to a transcription error.  I wasn't really confident in my
recollection so I went and looked it up and fell into reading about
"[Academic urban legends][]".

It's a wild ride.  So many twists and turns.  Read the whole thing
before continuing here because spoilers follow.  Read the whole thing
even though I'm about to say how unsatisfying the conclusion is.

Now the original article is written on the topic of the quality of
academic citations, as promised in the abstract, but I'm here to talk
about spinach.

For me the story left too many questions unanswered.  Some easy to
resolve (spinach's iron content is high-middling in its class, and the
science has been broadly stable on this for well over a century), but
where did spinach's special status in popular understanding really come
from if not the origins we now take to be "debunked"?

After finding the original story's [main reference][Sutton, 2010b] for
declaring closure on the matter I was even _more_ dissatisfied.  I tried
plugging the names of the scientists mentioned into Google, and I found
discussion on the matter by a JL Dagg offering suggestions as to where
[pieces of the misplaced decimal story might have come from][Dagg,
2015].

I can't help but imagine all this as a long chain of pedantic
one-upmanship.

[Content Warning: gross oversimplification]

> Spinach is good for you because it contains a lot of iron.

> Well actually, that belief was caused by a decimal place error in the
> 1930s, causing the iron content to appear ten times greater than it
> actually was.

> Well actually, that's a popular misquote of what Terence Hamblin
> wrote.  The actual decimal error occurred in the 1890s and was
> _discovered_ in the 1930s.

> Well actually, Hamblin gave no references and it looks like they must
> have just imagined the whole thing.  Also, Popeye ate spinach for its
> vitamin A content, not iron.

> Well actually, Arnold Bender had published the same assertion several
> times prior to Hamblin, giving specific names and an example of a
> textbook perpetuating grossly exaggerated iron content.

> Well actually, those references don't join up and the book in question
> doesn't contain any decimal place error.  Also, nobody in the UK or US
> would have been influenced by the findings of these German scientists
> anyway.

> Well actually, it was a conflation of dry and fresh samples which
> merely _looked_ like a decimal place error because fresh spinach is
> roughly 90% water.

> well actually, one of the scientists left a footnote about needing to
> correct for the fact that the produce they bought from their local
> grocer was old and wilted.

> Well actually, it was the confusion between iron and iron oxide in the
> measurements.

> Well actually, it was the result of faulty scientific methods.

> Well actually, faulty recollections may well have synthesised this
> narrative from a series of actual events, including a decimal place
> error exaggerating iron content in 1939.  Also, the same flawed
> methodology was applied to several vegetables and consequently spinach
> was seen to be unexceptional in that context.

But of course none of this really matters, because iron in spinach is in
the wrong form for effective absorption, and because spinach contains
[oxalates][].

> Well actually...

Dagg's tone and approach appeals to me.  Rather than asking "is this
true?", which is a question I see as ultimately unhelpful and misleading
given the fractal nature of nuance and context, they ask "why do they
believe this?".

Is Dagg's hypothesis right?  There's no knowing that, but maybe I'll
just assume or pretend it's right because I can't do any better.  All
knowledge is provisional, after all (with apologies to Karl Popper).

But this still doesn't answer my original question.

#### What was the question again?

Why do people believe that spinach is a good source of iron?

[Dagg suggests][Dagg, 2017] a conflation of symptoms and remedies
relating to tuberculosis and anaemia.

But a much deeper dive into the matter is '[Spinach in Blunderland][]',
wherein we learn ... _a lot!_  Everything that went before is,
comparatively, a very narrow and distorted view on a much broader
picture.

I can't possibly summarise it all, but one thing that stands out to me
in this narrative is the reappearance of Gustav von Bunge.  In this
context Bunge's research appears to _debunk_ earlier, unreasonably high
figures but, importantly, the matter goes viral with the effect of
drawing public attention to the still-relatively-high iron content in
Bunge's results.  The values aren't _exceptionally_ high by modern
estimates, but high enough to cause a wave of misplaced enthusiasm
around the world.

It seems that the resulting public over-enthusiasm had been called out a
few times subsequently, but virality had not been attained until Hamblin
got the matter into BMJ in 1981 and people started digging in to the
origin of the resulting citations.

Unfortunately the subsequent focus has been on falsifying a specific error
at a specific point in a specific line of communication in order
to produce a debunked myth, without due regard to the greater network
of errors and miscommunications which produced the outcome; and in
order to achieve that great debunk a lot of truths were overlooked.

Despite all that there's still a final possibility: that the popular
belief about spinach having high iron content exists simply because it's
basically true.  It isn't the best, but among commonly recognised and
available plant sources it seems to still rate fairly highly (with
caveats and exceptions).  Maybe people don't mean anything more than
that when they repeat "the myth" that spinach is "high in iron".


[Louis Edward Saalmüller]: <>
[Thomas Richardson]: <>
[Jacob Moleschott]: <>
[Jean Baptiste Boussingault]: <>
[Gustav von Bunge]: <>
[Emil von Wolff]: <>
[E. Haensel]: <>
[C. den Hartog]: <>
[Werner Schuphan]: <>
[H.C. Sherman]: <>
[Arnold Bender]: <>
[Terence Hamblin]: <>

[Academic urban legends]: <https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4232290/> "Academic urban legends"
[Academic urban legends alternate]: <https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0306312714535679> "Academic urban legends"
[Sutton, 2010b]: <https://dysology.blogspot.com/2017/12/the-spinach-popeye-iron-decimal-error.html> "The Spinach, Popeye, Iron, Decimal Error Myth is Finally Busted"
[Sutton, 2010b alternate]: <https://archive.is/TzLh5> "The Spinach, Popeye, Iron, Decimal Error Myth is Finally Busted"
[Dagg, 2015]: <https://historiesofecology.blogspot.com/2015/10/the-real-decimal-point-error-that.html> "The real decimal error that transmogrified into the spinach-iron-decimal-error myth"
[Dagg, 2017]: <https://historiesofecology.blogspot.com/2017/10/the-deep-roots-of-urban-legends-about.html> "The deep roots of urban legends about the health benefits of spinach"

[Spinach in Blunderland]: <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/331556841_Spinach_in_Blunderland_How_the_myth_that_spinach_is_rich_in_iron_became_an_urban_academic_legend> "Spinach in Blunderland"
[Hamblin, 2010]: <https://mutated-unmuated.blogspot.com/2010/12/spinach-i-was-right-for-wrong-reason.html>
[Sutter, 2011]: <https://web.archive.org/web/20180119102354/https://www.bestthinking.com/articles/science/chemistry/biochemistry/spin-ge-usa-beware-of-the-bull-the-united-states-department-of-agriculture-is-spreading-bull-about-spinach-iron-and-vitamin-c-on-the-internet>

[oxalates]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxalate>
