---
last_modified_at: Thu, 27 Mar 2025 13:13:56 -0700  # 188d334 add-ai-and-compression-tags
layout: post
title: Automatic wiki
tags: ai, compression
---
A project I've wanted to do for a long while now, ia a dynamically generated wiki.  Use generative AI to produce an encyclopedic-looking page of text with a topic deduced from the URL and the random seed determined by a hash of the URL.

This randomly-generated content can be cached or regenerated as needed based on the same predictable RNG seed.

Each page, being a mock wiki page, contains randomly-generated references to other pages, and when these are followed those too are randomly generated according to their URL. 

Similarly it would contain image links as illustrations, needing also to be dynamically generated based on their URL.

No more broken links!  If a topic is referenced and the reference is followed then the content will be generated.

I was thinking it might be more interesting still to generate a string of edits, and to apply the edits to the base page.  But this would need to be rebuilt incrementally every time the page fell out of cache.  The alternative might be to dynamically generate reverse diffs when history is visited, but that's not really going to have the same effect on the default view and it works not emulated organic growth. 

Perhaps the edits could be a function of cache longevity; based on how many hits the page gets, and reverting if ever the page loses popularity.

But in any case, I wanted to write that down because I wanted it external to something else I'm writing.  So here it is.  External but without much effort or thought put into it.
