---
last_modified_at: Sat, 3 Aug 2024 21:13:35 -0700  # 3fc1ea7 a-handful-of-drafts
layout: post
title:  Overthinking wood stain
---
I need to refinish my dining table because a science experiment went a bit
wrong a while back.  Since I was never entirely happy with the colour, this
time I plan to apply some stain.

Stain is difficult.  It responds differently to different types of wood and
responds differently to different parts of the wood.  It soaks in (and darkens)
more where the wood is least dense and where the surface is the least smooth.
For this reason people recommend pre-stain wood conditioner (not to be confused
with butcher's block wood conditioner).

If I were to simply follow the wisdom of the ancients (or the internet) then I
would sand, sand, sand, and sand, then sand again by hand following the grain
of the wood, and then apply wood conditioner, then stain, and then apply a few
coats of finish (polyurethane in my case), maybe with a little more sanding
between each coat.

But who am I to listen to other people just because they probably know what
they're talking about?  I need to thoroughly overthink this!

Something I was uncomfortable with was that there's so much talk about how
penetrating oils (and stains) bring out the natural beauty of the wood much
better than more superficial finishes which just sit on top.  Surely if I apply
a wood conditioner, specifically to stop the stain from penetrating, then I
undermine that whole process.

So instead I spent an excruciating amount of time sanding and conditioning and
oiling and staining and resanding the underside of my table trying to get an
idea of what to expect from different solutions (no pun intended).

Instead of using an off-the-shelf wood conditioner I decided to dilute the
finish that I meant to use on top of the stain.  Linseed oil, a little
polyurethane, and a lot of mineral spirits.

The idea is to apply stain in the 15-120 minute window after applying the
conditioner.  Supposedly if you apply the stain too soon it mixes together and
dilutes the stain but doesn't stop it penetrating, and if you apply the stain
too late the conditioner has already set and the stain doesn't penetrate at
all.

That's not what I got with my own special brew.  I found that applying the
stain hours later gave darker results than if I applied it at 30 minutes.

I wonder if maybe the evaporation of the solvent meant the wood was no longer
saturated and drew stain in more easily.  Or perhaps the hardening of the oil
and poly raised the grain a little and made the surface rougher, which also
holds more stain.

But most importantly, I found that the conditioner and the stain don't really
stop subsequent layers from penetrating.  They go right through the stain, and
presumably into (or beyond?) the conditioner.

I also found that I hated what the stain did to the soft parts of the wood, no
matter what I tried.

The solution I settled on was more sanding.

First, where possible I scrub out those big flat areas of soft grain with my
sander, and tried to take as much as possible down to the harder wood beneath
it.  Doing this makes the surface wavy (like driftwood), but I don't mind.
It's a rustic finish.

Or I wouldn't mind in prinicple, but at certain angles it gives a definite H.
R. Giger Aliens vibe.  Apparently sand-blasting the wood is the proper way to
get this done, but I'm going to have to defer that until another science
experiment goes wrong.

Second, I gave the wood another sanding after the stain, by hand, along the
grain.  I'm supposed to do that before the stain, but I forgot and doing it
after worked out for the best.  It cut the stain into a nice flowing grain
texture while making it more muted.

Applying finish after all this still penetrated well, and brought out the
wood's innate [chatoyancy][] around the knots and parts where I'd scrubbed away
the soft wood, and the soft wood that remains still has a kind of approximation
of that where the stain seems to be suspended in the shape cut into it by the
sandpaper.  I'll need to get more layers down to see how that really turns out.


[chatoyancy]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chatoyancy>
